Add reduction tutorial (#3513)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/tutorial/reduction.rst

.. meta::
  :description: HIP reduction tutorial
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, reduction, tutorial

*************************************************************
Reduction
*************************************************************

> Reduction is a common algorithmic operation used in parallel programming to reduce an array of elements into a shorter array of elements or a single value. This document exploits reduction to introduce some key considerations while designing GPU algorithms and optimizing them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reduction is a common algorithmic operation used in parallel programming to reduce an array of elements into a shorter array of elements or a single value. This document exploits reduction to introduce some key considerations while designing and optimizing GPU algorithms.
```

> This article is a rejuvenation and extension of the invaluable `work of Mark Harris <https://developer.download.nvidia.com/assets/cuda/files/reduction.pdf>`_. While the author approaches the topic with a less naive approach, reviewing some original material is valuable to see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This document provides a greater insight to demonstrate progress.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document is a rejuvenation and extension of the invaluable `work of Mark Harris <https://developer.download.nvidia.com/assets/cuda/files/reduction.pdf>`_. While the author approaches the topic with a less naive approach, reviewing some original material is valuable to see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This document provides a greater insight to demonstrate progress.
```

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/foldl.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating fold left

There are multiple variations of reduction that allow parallel processing. The approach taken by ``std::reduce`` requires the user-provided binary operator to operate on any combination of identity and input range elements, or even exclusively on any of them. This allows you to insert any number of identities to facilitate parallel processing and then combine the partial results of parallel execution.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/parallel_foldl.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating parallel fold left

Reduction on GPUs
=================

Implementing reductions on GPUs requires a basic understanding of the :doc:`/understand/programming_model_reference`. The document explores aspects of low-level optimization best discussed through the :ref:`inherent_thread_model`, and refrains from using cooperative groups.

> Synchronizing parallel threads of execution across a GPU is crucial for correctness as the partial results can't be synchronized before they manifest. Synchronizing all the threads running on a GPU at any given point of time is possible, however it is a costly and intricate operation. If synchronization is not absolutely necessary, map the parallel algorithm so that multiprocessors and blocks can make independent progress and need not sync frequently.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synchronizing parallel threads of execution across a GPU is crucial for correctness as the partial results can't be synchronized before they manifest. Synchronizing all the threads running on a GPU at any given time is possible, however, it is a costly and intricate operation. If synchronization is not absolutely necessary, map the parallel algorithm so that multiprocessors and blocks can make independent progress and need not sync frequently.

```

> There are ten different reduction implementation in the `rocm-examples <https://github.com/StreamHPC/rocm-examples/tree/reduction-tutorial/Tutorials/Reduction/include/Reduction>`_, which are described in the following sections. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are ten reduction implementations in the `rocm-examples <https://github.com/StreamHPC/rocm-examples/tree/reduction-tutorial/Tutorials/Reduction/include/Reduction>`_, which are described in the following sections. 
```

Naive shared reduction
----------------------

The naive algorithm takes a tree-like shape, where the computational domain is purposefully distributed among blocks. In all blocks, all threads participate in loading data from persistent (from the kernel's perspective) global memory into the shared memory. This helps to perform tree-like reduction for a single thread by writing the partial result to global, in a location unique to the block, which allows the block to make independent progress. The partial results are combined in subsequent launches of the same kernel until a scalar result is reached.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/naive_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating naive reduction

> This approach requires temporary storage based on the number of blocks launched, as each block outputs a scalar partial result. Depending on the need to store or destroy the input, a second temporary storage might be needed, which could be large enough to store the results of the second kernel launch, or one can simply reuse the storage of the larger than necessary original input. These implementations differ so slightly that the document only considers the use case where the input could be destroyed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach requires temporary storage based on the number of blocks launched, as each block outputs a scalar partial result. Depending on the need to store or destroy the input, a second temporary storage might be needed, which could be large enough to store the results of the second kernel launch. Alternatively, you can reuse the storage of the larger than necessary original input. These implementations differ so slightly that the document only considers the use case where the input could be destroyed.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    std::size_t factor = block_size; // block_size from hipGetDeviceProperties()
    auto new_size = [factor](const std::size_t actual)
    {
        // Every pass reduces input length by 'factor'. If actual size is not divisible by factor,
        // an extra output element is produced using some number of zero_elem inputs.
        return actual / factor + (actual % factor == 0 ? 0 : 1);
    };

> For threads that don't have unique inputs of their own, feed ``zero_elem`` instances to threads. The backing of double-buffering is allocated is such:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For threads that don't have unique inputs, feed ``zero_elem`` instances to threads. The backing of double-buffering is allocated as such:
```

    }

This structure persists in the kernel throughout all the variations of reduction with slight modifications to ``factor`` and shared memory allocation:

.. code-block:: C++

    template<typename T, typename F>
    __global__ void kernel(
        T* front,
        T* back,
        F op,
        T zero_elem,
        uint32_t front_size)
    {
        extern __shared__ T shared[];

        // Overindex-safe read of input
        auto read_global_safe = [&](const uint32_t i)
        {
            return i < front_size ? front[i] : zero_elem;
        };

        const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                       bid = blockIdx.x,
                       gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;

        // Read input from front buffer to shared
        shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
        __syncthreads();

        // Shared reduction
        for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
        {
            if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
                shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
            __syncthreads();
        }

        // Write result from shared to back buffer
        if (tid == 0)
            back[bid] = shared[0];
    }

> While the ``tid % (2 * i) == 0`` indexing scheme yields correct results, it also leads to high thread divergence. Thread divergence indicates the event when the threads in a warp diverge, which implies that the threads have to execute different instructions in a given clock cycle. This is easily manifested using ``if-else`` statements as shown here, but can also be manifested as ``for`` loop dependent on thread id lengths. Even though the number of active threads participating in the reduction reduces, warps remain active for longer than necessary, as at least one lane in a warp hits the ``if`` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the ``tid % (2 * i) == 0`` indexing scheme yields correct results, it also leads to high thread divergence. Thread divergence indicates the event when the threads in a warp diverge, which implies that the threads have to execute different instructions in a given clock cycle. This is easily manifested using ``if-else`` statements as shown here, but can also be manifested as ``for`` loop dependent on thread id lengths. Even though the number of active threads participating in the reduction reduces, warps remain active longer than necessary, as at least one lane in a warp hits the ``if`` statement.
```

Reducing thread divergence
--------------------------

You can reduce divergence by keeping dataflow between memory addresses identical but reassigning the thread ids.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/reduced_divergence_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating reduced divergence reduction

.. note::

    For those less proficient in reading Git diffs, the following code segments show changes between the two versions of a file. Lines highlighted in red are being removed or changed while lines highlighted in green are being introduced.

.. code-block:: diff

    // Shared reduction
    for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
    {
    -    if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
    -        shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
    +    if (uint32_t j = 2 * i * tid; j < blockDim.x)
    +        shared[j] = op(shared[j], shared[j + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }

This way inactive threads start accumulating uniformly towards the higher thread id index range and might uniformly skip to ``__syncthreads()``. However, this introduces a bank conflicts issue.

Resolving bank conflicts
------------------------

> Both AMD and NVIDIA implement shared memory in the hardware by organizing storage into banks of various sizes. On the AMD hardware, this hardware element is known as Local Data Share (LDS). On NVIDIA hardware, it's implemented using the same silicon as the L1 data cache. You can think of shared memory  as a striped 2-dimensional range of memory. Shared memory bank's count, width, and depth depend on the architecture. A bank conflict occurs when different threads in a warp access the same bank during the same operation. In this case, the hardware prevents the attempted concurrent accesses to the same bank by converting them into serial accesses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both AMD and NVIDIA implement shared memory in the hardware by organizing storage into banks of various sizes. This hardware element is known as Local Data Share (LDS) on AMD hardware. On NVIDIA hardware, it's implemented using the same silicon as the L1 data cache. You can think of shared memory as a striped 2-dimensional range of memory. Shared memory bank's count, width, and depth depend on the architecture. A bank conflict occurs when different threads in a warp access the same bank during the same operation. In this case, the hardware prevents the attempted concurrent accesses to the same bank by converting them into serial accesses.
```

Reviewer: Something wrong with this sentence:
Shared memory bank's count, width, and depth depend on the architecture.

A notable exception is when the shared read uniformly broadcasts to the same address across the entire warp. A better implementation of the naive algorithm is to form continuous ranges of the threads activities and their memory accesses.

.. code-block:: diff

    // Shared reduction
    -for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
    -{
    -    if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
    +for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i != 0; i /= 2)
    +{
    +    if (tid < i)
            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/conflict_free_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating bank conflict free reduction

.. note::

    To avoid bank conflicts, read shared memory in a coalesced manner, which implies that reads/writes of each lane in a warp evaluate to consecutive locations. Analyzing the read/write patterns could help you to understand the cause of bank conflicts. For more details, refer to the linked ISA documents (add link).

Utilize upper half of the block
-------------------------------

> The preceding implementation is free of low-level GPU-specific anti-patterns, however it still exhibits some common shortcomings. The loop performing the reduction in the shared memory starts from ``i = blockDim.x / 2`` and the first predicate ``if (tid < i)`` immediately disables half of the block, which only helps load the data into the shared memory. You can change the kernel along with the calculation of ``factor`` on the host, as shown here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding implementation is free of low-level GPU-specific anti-patterns. However, it still exhibits some common shortcomings. The loop performing the reduction in the shared memory starts from ``i = blockDim.x / 2`` and the first predicate ``if (tid < i)`` immediately disables half of the block, which only helps load the data into the shared memory. You can change the kernel along with the calculation of ``factor`` on the host, as shown here:
```

.. code-block:: diff

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                   bid = blockIdx.x,
    -              gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;
    +              gid = bid * (blockDim.x * 2) + tid;

    // Read input from front buffer to shared
    -shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
    +shared[tid] = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));
    __syncthreads();

> By eliminating half of the threads and giving meaningful work to all the threads by unconditionally performing a binary ``op``, you can prevent wastage of half of the threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By eliminating half of the threads and giving meaningful work to all the threads by unconditionally performing a binary ``op``, you can prevent the wastage of half of the threads.
```

Even though global memory is read in a coalesced fashion, as preferred by the memory controller, optimal performance is still limited by the instruction throughput.
Omit superfluous synchronization
--------------------------------

> Warps are known to execute in a strictly lockstep fashion, therefore once shared reduction reaches a point where only a single warp participates meaningfully, you can cut short the loop and let the rest of the warps terminate. Moreover, you can also unroll the loop without syncing the entire block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Warps are known to execute in a strict lockstep fashion. Therefore, once shared reduction reaches a point where only a single warp participates meaningfully, you can cut short the loop and let the rest of the warps terminate. Moreover, you can also unroll the loop without syncing the entire block.
```

**GCC**

.. code-block:: asm

    .LC0:
        .string "%d"
    main:
        push    rbx
        xor     ebx, ebx
    .L2:
        mov     esi, ebx
        mov     edi, OFFSET FLAT:.LC0
        xor     eax, eax
        add     ebx, 1
        call    printf
        cmp     ebx, 4
        jne     .L2
        xor     eax, eax
        pop     rbx
        ret

**MSVC**

.. code-block::

    main    PROC
        $LN12:
        push    rbx
        sub     rsp, 32
        xor     ebx, ebx
        npad    8
    $LL4@main:
        mov     edx, ebx
        lea     rcx, OFFSET FLAT:'string'
        call    printf
        inc     ebx
        cmp     ebx, 4
        jl      SHORT $LL4@main
        xor     eax, eax
        add     rsp, 32
        pop     rbx
        ret     0
    main    ENDP

LLVM unrolls the loop and compiles to a flat series of ``printf`` invocations, while both GCC and MSVC keep the loop intact, as visible from the compare (``cmp``) and the jump (``jne``, ``jl``) instructions. LLVM code generation is identical to manually writing the unrolled loop:

.. code-block:: C++

    printf("%d", 0);
    printf("%d", 1);
    printf("%d", 2);
    printf("%d", 3);

> While there are various non-standard pragmas available to hint or force the compiler to unroll the loop, we instead use template meta-programming to force feed the compiler the unrolled loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While various non-standard pragmas are available to hint or force the compiler to unroll the loop, we instead use template meta-programming to force feed the compiler the unrolled loop.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    constexpr int size = 4;

    // Maybe unrolled loop
    for (int i = 0 ; i < size ; ++i)
    {
        printf("%d", i);
    }

    // Force unrolled loop
    using namespace tmp;
    static_for<0, less_than<size>, increment<1>>([]<int i>()
    {
        printf("%d", i);
    });

> The most notable structural difference is that in the language ``for`` loop, the loop variable is given a name in the beginning, while in the ``static_for`` utility, the loop variable is given a name in the end. An important bonus is that in the body of the loop, you can use the running index ``i`` in contexts requiring constant expressions such as template arguments or inside ``if constexpr``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most notable structural difference is that in the language ``for`` loop, the loop variable is given a name in the beginning, while in the ``static_for`` utility, the loop variable is given a name in the end. An important bonus is that in the loop's body, you can use the running index ``i`` in contexts requiring constant expressions such as template arguments or inside ``if constexpr``.
```

:code:`tmp::static_switch` takes runtime value and runtime dispatches to a range of set of tabulated functions, where said value is a compile-time constant and is eligible for use in compile-time evaluated contexts.

Consider the following code:

.. code-block:: C++

    int warp_size = device_props.warpSize;
    switch (warp_size)
    {
    case 32:
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(kernel<32>, ...);
        break;
    case 64:
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(kernel<64>, ...);
        break;
    }

> In the preceding code, note the code repetition for all possible values of ``warp_size``, the code is prepared to handle. To avoid this, use ``tmp::static_switch``, as shown:

Reviewer: not sure - perhaps:
... that the code is prepared to handle.

    });

.. code-block:: diff

    -template<typename T, typename F>
    +template<uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    __global__ void kernel(
        ...
    )
    {
        ...
    // Shared reduction
    -for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i != 0; i /= 2)
    +for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i > WarpSize; i /= 2)
    {
        if (tid < i)
            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }
    +// Warp reduction
    +tmp::static_for<WarpSize, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int I>()
    +{
    +    if (tid < I)
    +        shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + I]);
    +#ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
    +    __syncwarp(0xffffffff >> (WarpSize - I));
    +#endif
    +});

Because HIP typically targets hardware with warp sizes of 32 (NVIDIA GPUs and RDNA AMD GPUs) and 64 (CDNA AMD GPUs), portable HIP code must handle both. That is why instead of assuming a warp size of 32, make the warp size a template argument of the kernel. This allows you to unroll the final loop using ``tmp::static_for`` in a parametric way but still having the code read much like an ordinary loop.

> Promoting the warp size to being a compile-time constant also requires you to handle it similarly on the host-side as well. You can sandwich the kernel launch with ``tmp::static_switch``, promoting the snake-case run-time ``warp_size`` variable to a camel-case compile-time constant ``WarpSize``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promoting the warp size to being a compile-time constant also requires you to handle it similarly on the host-side. You can sandwich the kernel launch with ``tmp::static_switch``, promoting the snake-case run-time ``warp_size`` variable to a camel-case compile-time constant ``WarpSize``.
```

                dim3(new_size(curr)),
                dim3(block_size),
                factor * sizeof(unsigned),
                hipStreamDefault,
                front,
                back,
                kernel_op,
                zero_elem,
                curr);
    +    });
        ...
    }

.. note::

    Neither RDNA- nor CDNA-based AMD hardware provides guaranteed independent progress to lanes of the same warp.  When targeting NVIDIA hardware, lanes of a warp might execute somewhat independently as long as the programmer assists the compiler using dedicated built-in functions. This feature is called Independent Thread Scheduling. The HIP headers don't expose the necessary warp primitives and their overloads.

    Portable applications can still tap into this feature with carefully ``#ifdef`` -ed code, but at this particular optimization level, it's a requirement. The code implicitly relies on the lockstep behavior of an ROCm wavefront, but CUDA warps don't share this property. You must synchronize all the active lanes of a warp to avoid a data race with some lanes progressing faster than others in the same warp.

Unroll all loops
----------------

> While the previous step primarily aims at removing the unnecessary syncing, it also additionally unrolls the end of the loop. However, you could also force unrolling the first part of the loop. This saves a few scalar registers (values the compiler can prove to be uniform across warps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the previous step primarily aims to remove unnecessary syncing, it also unrolls the end of the loop. However, you could also force unrolling the first part of the loop. This saves a few scalar registers (values the compiler can prove to be uniform across warps).
```

See how to use ``__shfl_down()``, which is one of the most restrictive but also the most structured communication schemes.

.. code-block:: C++

    // Warp reduction
    if (tid < WarpSize)
    {
        T res = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + WarpSize]);
        tmp::static_for<WarpSize / 2, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int Delta>()
        {
            res = op(res, __shfl_down(res, Delta));
        });

        // Write result from shared to back buffer
        if (tid == 0)
            back[bid] = res;
    }

Using warp-collective functions for communication requires the control flow to be uniform across warps, as the name warp-collective implies. Therefore, you can see that the thread id is being checked outside the loop, but the result is written inside due to variable scoping.

Prefer warp communication over shared
-------------------------------------

> As mentioned in the previous step, communication between local memory is faster than shared memory. Instead of relying on the local memory only at the end of the tree-like reduction, it is a better approach to turn the tree reduction inside out and perform multiple warp reductions in parallel on all active threads, thus communicating only their partial results through the shared memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the previous step, communication between local memory is faster than shared memory. Instead of relying on the local memory only at the end of the tree-like reduction, a better approach is to turn the tree reduction inside out and perform multiple warp reductions in parallel on all active threads, thus communicating only their partial results through the shared memory.
```

The kernel versions differ significantly enough to be described using a diff; use afresh instead.

.. code-block:: C++

    template<uint32_t BlockSize, uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    __global__ __launch_bounds__(BlockSize) void kernel(
        T* front,
        T* back,
        F op,
        T zero_elem,
        uint32_t front_size)
    {
        // ...
    }

The kernel signature and the reduction factor are the same as in previous cases; only the implementation differs.

.. code-block:: C++

    static constexpr uint32_t WarpCount = BlockSize / WarpSize;

    __shared__ T shared[WarpCount];

    auto read_global_safe =
        [&](const uint32_t i) { return i < front_size ? front[i] : zero_elem; };
    auto read_shared_safe =
        [&](const uint32_t i) { return i < WarpCount ? shared[i] : zero_elem; };

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                   bid = blockIdx.x,
                   gid = bid * (blockDim.x * 2) + tid,
                   wid = tid / WarpSize,
                   lid = tid % WarpSize;

    // Read input from front buffer to local
    T res = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));

> As we communicate the results of warps through shared memory, same number of elements are required in the shared memory as warps within the block. Similar to how you can only launch kernels at block granularity, you can only warp reduce with ``WarpSize`` granularity due to the collective nature of the cross-lane builtins. To address this, you can use ``read_shared_safe`` to pad overindexing by reading ``zero_elem``. Reading from global remains unaffected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we communicate the results of warps through shared memory, the same number of elements are required in the shared memory as warps within the block. Similar to how you can only launch kernels at block granularity, you can only warp reduce with ``WarpSize`` granularity due to the collective nature of the cross-lane builtins. To address this, you can use ``read_shared_safe`` to pad overindexing by reading ``zero_elem``. Reading from global remains unaffected.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    // Perform warp reductions and communicate results via shared
    // for (uint32_t ActiveWarps = WarpCount;
    //      ActiveWarps != 0;
    //      ActiveWarps = ActiveWarps != 1 ?
    //          divide_ceil(ActiveWarps, WarpSize) :
    //          ActiveWarps = 0)
    tmp::static_for<
        WarpCount,
        tmp::not_equal<0>,
        tmp::select<
            tmp::not_equal<1>,
            tmp::divide_ceil<WarpSize>,
            tmp::constant<0>>>([&]<uint32_t ActiveWarps>()
    {
        if(wid < ActiveWarps)
        {
            // Warp reduction
            tmp::static_for<WarpSize / 2, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int Delta>()
            {
                res = op(res, __shfl_down(res, Delta));
            });

            // Write warp result from local to shared
            if(lid == 0)
                shared[wid] = res;
        }
        __syncthreads();

        // Read warp result from shared to local
        res = read_shared_safe(tid);
    });

    // Write result from local to back buffer
    if(tid == 0)
        back[bid] = res;

> ``ActiveWarps`` iterates from ``WarpCount`` until it reaches ``0``. Every iteration of ``ActiveWarps`` reduces the ``WarpSize``. In cases where the partial result count isn't a divisor of ``ActiveWarps`` and you need to launch an extra warp, use ``tmp::divide_ceil``, which always rounds to positive infinity. You need the tertiary ``tmp::select``, because such division never reaches ``0``, so you must terminate the loop after the last warp concludes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ActiveWarps`` iterates from ``WarpCount`` until it reaches ``0``. Every iteration of ``ActiveWarps`` reduces the ``WarpSize``. In cases where the partial result count isn't a divisor of ``ActiveWarps`` and you need to launch an extra warp, use ``tmp::divide_ceil``, which always rounds to positive infinity. The tertiary ``tmp::select`` is required because such division never reaches ``0``, so you must terminate the loop after the last warp concludes.
```

> In each iteration, if the warp is active, which means that it has at least a single valid input, it carries out a pass of warp reduction and writes output based on warp id. Reading is carried out based on thread id. Global output continues to be based on block id.

Reviewer: Add instances of id should probably be ID.

Author: Pushed id -> ID anywhere in the tutorials.

> In each iteration, if the warp is active, which means that it has at least a single valid input, it carries out a pass of warp reduction and writes output based on warp id. Reading is carried out based on thread id. Global output continues to be based on block id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each iteration, if the warp is active, which means it has at least a single valid input, it carries out a pass of warp reduction and writes output based on warp id. Reading is carried out based on thread id. Global output continues to be based on block id.
```

Amortize bookkeeping variable overhead
--------------------------------------

> The previous sections explained how to reduce register usage to improve occupancy, which allows more blocks to execute in parallel on all multiprocessors, leading to more global store/load latency to be hidden. Reducing the number of kernels in flight while still carrying out the same workload reduces wastage of registers while loading and maintaining bookkeeping variables such as kernel indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous sections explained how to reduce register usage to improve occupancy. This allows more blocks to execute in parallel on all multiprocessors, leading to more global store/load latency to be hidden. Reducing the number of kernels in flight while still carrying out the same workload reduces the wastage of registers while loading and maintaining bookkeeping variables such as kernel indices.
```

An example of this optimization is performing one binary ``op`` while loading input from global. Even though the operation is said to be carried out "in flight", the two values are loaded into local memory (registers) before ``op`` is called.

> A more general form of this optimization is wrapping most of the kernel logic in loops that carry out the workload of multiple kernel instances but require storing only a single instance of most of the bookkeeping logic. In code, this multiplicity factor is referred to via the ``ItemsPerThread`` compile-time constant, which is supplied by a template argument to allow for loop unrolling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more general form of this optimization is wrapping most kernel logic in loops that carry out the workload of multiple kernel instances but require storing only a single instance of most of the bookkeeping logic. In code, this multiplicity factor is referred to via the ``ItemsPerThread`` compile-time constant, which is supplied by a template argument to allow for loop unrolling.
```

This kernel variant utilizes another generally applicable utility known as ``hip::static_array``, which is a more restrictive wrapper over the builtin array than ``std::array``, as it allows indexing only compile-time constants using the usual tuple-like ``template <size_t I> auto get<I>(...)`` interface.

.. note::

>     On a GPU, there is no stack and the local memory is provisioned from the register file; this provisioning takes place statically. To paraphrase, the address range of a thread's local memory is determined at compile-time. When an array is defined and used in the local storage, the compiler can only maintain its storage in the register file as long as all accesses to the array are computable by the compiler at compile-time. It doesn't strictly need to be a compile-time constant as long as the compiler can resolve the addresses of the accesses through constant folding or some other means. If the compiler fails to do so, the array will be backed by global memory, which is indicated by allocating a non-zero number of spill registers observable using static analysis tools, however this is slower by magnitude of multiple order. ``hip::static_array`` via its ``hip::get<>`` interface ensures that no such spills occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On a GPU, there is no stack, and the local memory is provisioned from the register file. This provisioning takes place statically. To paraphrase, the address range of a thread's local memory is determined at compile-time. When an array is defined and used in the local storage, the compiler can only maintain its storage in the register file as long as all accesses to the array are computable by the compiler at compile-time. It doesn't need to be a compile-time constant as long as the compiler can resolve the addresses of the accesses through constant folding or some other means. If the compiler fails to do so, the array will be backed by global memory, which is indicated by allocating a non-zero number of spill registers observable using static analysis tools. However, this is slower by the magnitude of multiple order. ``hip::static_array`` via its ``hip::get<>`` interface ensures that no such spills occur.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    template<uint32_t BlockSize, uint32_t WarpSize, uint32_t ItemsPerThread>
    __global__ static __launch_bounds__(BlockSize) void kernel(...)

> The kernel has three compile-time configurable parameters now. The only part of the kernel that changes depends on how you load data from global and perform the binary operation on those loaded values. So, the following step to read input from front buffer to global is now split into two steps: :ref:`reading ``ItemsPerThread`` <reading-items>`and :ref:`processing ``ItemsPerThread`` <processing-items>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kernel now has three compile-time configurable parameters. The only part of the kernel that changes depends on how you load data from global and perform the binary operation on those loaded values. So, the following step to read input from front buffer to global is now split into two steps: :ref:`reading ``ItemsPerThread`` <reading-items>`and :ref:`processing ``ItemsPerThread`` <processing-items>`.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    // Read input from front buffer to local
    T res = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));

.. _reading-items:

Reading ``ItemsPerThread``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The change to reading happens inside `read_global_safe`:

.. code-block:: C++

    auto read_global_safe = [&](const int32_t i) -> hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>
    {
        return [&]<int32_t... I>(std::integer_sequence<int32_t, I...>)
        {
            if(i + ItemsPerThread < front_size)
                return hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>{
                    front[i + I]...
                };
            else
                return hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>{
                    (i + I < front_size ? front[i + I] : zero_elem)...
                };
        }(std::make_integer_sequence<int32_t, ItemsPerThread>());
    };

Note that each array element is being loaded consecutively without the flexibility of a configurable ``ItemsPerThread`` property. This is morally equivalent to:

.. code-block:: C++

    T arr[4] = {
        front[gid + 0],
        front[gid + 1],
        front[gid + 2],
        front[gid + 3]
    }

> This is exactly what's happening in the ``front[i + I]...`` fold-expression. However, this can only be issued if the entire read is operating on real input without padding using ``zero_elem``. If some reads over-index the input, the read turns into:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is exactly what's happening in the ``front[i + I]...`` fold-expression. However, this can only be issued if the entire read operates on real input without padding using ``zero_elem``. If some reads over-index the input, the read turns into:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    T arr[4] = {
        i + 0 < front_size ? front[i + 0] : zero_elem,
        i + 1 < front_size ? front[i + 1] : zero_elem,
        i + 2 < front_size ? front[i + 2] : zero_elem,
        i + 3 < front_size ? front[i + 3] : zero_elem
    }

> This is performed to make it easier for the compiler to recognize vector loads from global. As the performance at large is dominated by how you move the data, it's only natural to utilize dedicated instructions to move more data with less binary. This is evident by the huge performance improvement when loading two values per thread, See `the compiler explorer <https://godbolt.org/z/b36Eea69q>`_ to learn how loading for AMD (both RDNA and CDNA) compiles to ``global_load_dwordx4``, where ``x4`` denotes the 4-vector variant of the instruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes it easier for the compiler to recognize vector loads from global. As the performance at large is dominated by how you move the data, it's only natural to utilize dedicated instructions to move more data with less binary. This is evident by the huge performance improvement when loading two values per thread. For more information, see `the compiler explorer <https://godbolt.org/z/b36Eea69q>`_ to learn how loading for AMD (both RDNA and CDNA) compiles to ``global_load_dwordx4``, where ``x4`` denotes the 4-vector variant of the instruction.
```

.. note::

>     Note that ``read_global_safe`` that used to take an ``uint32_t`` as the index type, takes a signed integer now. When indexing an array with unsigned integers, the compiler has to handle integer overflows, as they're defined by the C/C++ standards. It might happen, that some part of the vector load indices overflow, thus resulting in a non-contiguous read. If you change the previously linked code to use an unsigned integer as the thread id, the compiler won't emit a vector load. Signed integer overflow is an undefined behavior, and hence unknown to the optimizer. To convey the absence of overflow to the compiler with unsigned indices, add ``__builtin_assume(gid + 4 > gid)``, or the more portable ``[[assume]](gid + 4 > gid)``, once ``amdclang++`` supports it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that ``read_global_safe``, which used to take an ``uint32_t`` as the index type, now takes a signed integer. When indexing an array with unsigned integers, the compiler has to handle integer overflows, as the C/C++ standards defined them. It might happen that some part of the vector load indices overflow, thus resulting in a non-contiguous read. If you change the previously linked code to use an unsigned integer as the thread id, the compiler won't emit a vector load. Signed integer overflow is an undefined behavior, and hence, unknown to the optimizer. To convey the absence of overflow to the compiler with unsigned indices, add ``__builtin_assume(gid + 4 > gid)``, or the more portable ``[[assume]](gid + 4 > gid)``, once ``amdclang++`` supports it.
```

> ``read_global_safe`` implementation is an Immediately Invoked Lambda Expression (IILE), because ``ItemsPerThread`` is an integer value, while you need a compile-time ``iota``-like sequence of integers as a pack for the fold-expressions to expand on. This can only take place as part of template argument deduction on the IILE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``read_global_safe`` implementation is an Immediately Invoked Lambda Expression (IILE), because ``ItemsPerThread`` is an integer value, while you need a compile-time ``iota``-like sequence of integers as a pack for the fold-expressions to expand on. This can only occur as part of template argument deduction on the IILE.
```

.. _processing-items:

Processing ``ItemsPerThread``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once the kernel reads ``ItemsPerThread`` number of inputs to local, it immediately reduces them to a scalar. There is no reason to propagate the input element multiplicity to the warp reduction phase.

.. code-block:: C++

    T res = [&]()
    {
        // Read input from front buffer to local
        hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread> arr = read_global_safe(gid);

        // Reduce ItemsPerThread to scalar
        tmp::static_for<1, tmp::less_than<ItemsPerThread>, tmp::increment<1>>([&]<int I>()
        {
            get<0>(arr) = op(get<0>(arr), get<I>(arr));
        });

        return get<0>(arr);
    }();

Two-pass reduction
------------------

> Alter kernel launch and input fetching such that no more blocks are launched than what a subsequent kernel launch's single block can conveniently reduce, while performing multiple passes of input reading from global and combining their results before engaging in the end game tree-like reduction.

Reviewer: Something is off in this sentence. I can't quite understand it. Difficult to comment.

> With this method, you can save at least one to two kernel launches for really large inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this method, you can save at least one to two kernel launches for large inputs.
```

Global data share
-----------------

.. warning::

    This modification can only be executed on AMD hardware.

> Perform the first step of the two-pass reduction, but in the end, instead of writing to global and reading it back in a subsequent kernel, write the partial results to the Global Data Share (GDS). This is an ``N+1`` th shared memory that is accessed by all multiprocessors and is also on-chip memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Perform the first step of the two-pass reduction, but in the end, instead of writing to global and reading it back in a subsequent kernel, write the partial results to the Global Data Share (GDS). This is an ``N+1`` **th** shared memory that is accessed by all multiprocessors and is also on-chip memory.
```

Reviewer: what is the th?

Author: I would not make it bold.  The problem: https://www.reddit.com/r/math/comments/nw5lb1/n1st_or_n1th/

.. note::

>     The order in which blocks are scheduled isn't guaranteed by the API, even though all GPUs schedule them in the same monotonically increasing order of block ids. Relying on this implicitly, the last block of a grid is in the optimal position to observe the side-effects of all other blocks (using spinlocks or other methods) without occupying a multiprocessor for longer than necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The API doesn't guarantee the order in which blocks are scheduled even though all GPUs schedule them in the same monotonically increasing order of block ids. Relying on this implicitly, the last block of a grid is in the optimal position to observe the side effects of all other blocks (using spinlocks or other methods) without occupying a multiprocessor for longer than necessary.
```

> Without launching a second kernel, you can make the last block collect the results of all other blocks from GDS by either implicitly exploiting the scheduling behavior or relying on another AMD-specific feature called Global Wave Sync (GWS) to merge them for a final tree-like reduction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without launching a second kernel, you can make the last block collect the results of all other blocks from GDS by implicitly exploiting the scheduling behavior or relying on another AMD-specific feature called Global Wave Sync (GWS) to merge them for a final tree-like reduction.
```

.. note::

>     Both GDS and GWS are reserved features of the runtime that aren't covered by the HIP API. Invoking these functionalities currently requires inline AMDGCN assembly. Moreover, the fact that the GDS isn't virtualized by the runtime, imposes further restrictions on concurrent scheduling of other kernels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    GDS and GWS are reserved runtime features that the HIP API doesn’t cover. Invoking these functionalities requires inline AMDGCN assembly. Moreover, the fact that the runtime doesn’t virtualize the GDS, imposes further restrictions on concurrent scheduling of other kernels.
```

Conclusion
==========

Optimizing code on GPUs, like on any other architecture, requires careful consideration and balancing of resources and costs of various operations to obtain optimal performance. This document explored optimizing reductions much beyond the territory of diminishing returns. This approach allowed us to introduce multiple optimization techniques and discuss opportunities, which is helpful in the bigger scheme of things.

The document focused on reductions when an entire device participates in it, but the choice of optimal compile-time constants or even the algorithm itself might not be optimal in cases when its multiple blocks participate in multiple parallel reductions or when each thread performs its own reduction. However, when multiple devices participate in the same reduction, a whole new bunch of aspects must be considered.

> Most of the solutions, including the ones covered in this document, are given to the end users in a turnkey fashion via algorithm primitive libraries. These solutions might not be the fastest in all cases, but are close to being gold standards of carrying out certain operations as reasonably as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizing code on GPUs, like on any other architecture, requires careful consideration and balancing of resources and costs of various operations to obtain optimal performance. This document explored optimizing reductions much beyond the territory of diminishing returns. This approach introduced multiple optimization techniques and discussed opportunities.

The document focused on reductions when an entire device participates in it. Still, the choice of optimal compile-time constants or even the algorithm itself might not be optimal when its multiple blocks participate in multiple parallel reductions or when each thread performs its reduction. However, when multiple devices participate in the same reduction, other aspects must be considered.

Most solutions, including the ones covered in this document, are given to the end users in a turnkey fashion via algorithm primitive libraries. These solutions might not be the fastest in all cases, but they are close to being the gold standard for carrying out certain operations as reasonably as possible.
```

.. meta::
  :description: HIP reduction tutorial
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, reduction, tutorial

*************************************************************
Reduction
*************************************************************

> Reduction is an algorithmic operation that doesn't trivially map to GPUs and can be used as a good example to introduce some key considerations of designing GPU algorithms and optimizing them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reduction is a common algorithmic operation used in parallel programming to reduce an array of elements into a single value. This document exploits reduction to introduce some key considerations while designing GPU algorithms and optimizing them.
```

Author: My suggestion is committed:

"Reduction is a common algorithmic operation used in parallel programming to reduce an array of elements into a shorter array of elements or a single value. This document exploits reduction to introduce some key considerations while designing GPU algorithms and optimizing them."

We call the reduction multiple times to reach a single value.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

.. code-block:: diff

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                   bid = blockIdx.x,
    -              gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;
    +              gid = bid * (blockDim.x * 2) + tid;

    // Read input from front buffer to shared
    -shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
    +shared[tid] = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));
    __syncthreads();

By eliminating half of the threads and giving meaningful work to all the threads by unconditionally performing a binary ``op``, you can prevent wastage of half of the threads.

While global memory is read in a coalesced fashion which the memory controller prefers, we're still some ways from optimal performance, hinting at being limited by instruction throughput.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though global memory is read in a coalesced fashion, as preferred by the memory controller, optimal performance is still limited by the instruction throughput.
```
This was my original suggestion. I am not sure what changed here.

.. meta::

>   :description: The reduction tutorial on HIP

Reviewer 2: HIP reduction tutorial

Author: Fixed.

  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, reduction, tutorial

*************************************************************

> Tutorial: Reduction

Reviewer 2: Reduction

Author: Fixed.

*************************************************************

> Reduction is an algorithmic operation that doesn't trivially map to GPUs but is ubiquitous enough to be of general interest while providing an excuse to introduce some key considerations of designing GPU algorithms and optimizing them.

Reviewer 2: This definition is very vague, almost like a blog. Can we explain it in simple terms.

Author: Tried to rephrase this sentence.

Reviewer 2: Changed it.

This article is a rejuvenation and extension of the invaluable `work of Mark Harris <https://developer.download.nvidia.com/assets/cuda/files/reduction.pdf>`_. While the author usually approaches the topic from a less naive approach, reviewing some original material is valuable to see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This article will go beyond to demonstrate progress.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article is a rejuvenation and extension of the invaluable `work of Mark Harris <https://developer.download.nvidia.com/assets/cuda/files/reduction.pdf>`_. While the author approaches the topic with a less naive approach, reviewing some original material is valuable to see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This document provides a greater insight to demonstrate progress.

```

The algorithm
=============

> Reduction has many names depending on the domain: in functional programming it's referred to as `fold <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_(higher-order_function)>`_, in C++ it is called ``std::accumulate`` and as of  ++17 ``std::reduce``. A reduction takes a range of inputs and "reduces" said range with a binary operation to a singular/scalar output. Canonically a reduction requires a so called "zero" element, which bootstraps the algorithm and serves as one of the initial operands to the binary operation. ("Zero" element more generally is called `identity or neutral <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_element>`_ element in group theory, meaning it is an operand which does not change the result.) Typical use cases would be calculating a sum or wanting to normalize a dataset and looking for the maximum value of a dataset. We'll be exploring the latter in this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Reduction has many names depending on the domain; in functional programming it's referred to as `fold <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_(higher-order_function)>`_, in C++, it's called ``std::accumulate`` and in C++17, as ``std::reduce``. A reduction takes a range of inputs and "reduces" the given range with a binary operation to a singular or scalar output. Canonically, a reduction requires a "zero" element that bootstraps the algorithm and serves as one of the initial operands to the binary operation. The "zero" element is generally called `identity or neutral <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_element>`_ element in the group theory, which implies that it is an operand that doesn't change the result. Some typical use cases are: calculating a sum or normalizing a dataset and finding the maximum value in the dataset. The latter use case is discussed further in this tutorial.

Author: Fixed.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/foldl.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating fold left

There are multiple variations of reduction to allow parallel processing. The approach taken by ``std::reduce`` is to require the user-provided binary operator to operate on any combination of identity, and input range elements, even exclusively one or the other. This allows inserting any number of identities to allow parallel processing and then allows combining the partial results of parallel execution.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are multiple variations of reduction that allow parallel processing. The approach taken by ``std::reduce`` requires the user-provided binary operator to operate on any combination of identity and input range elements, or even exclusively on any of them. This allows you to insert any number of identities to facilitate parallel processing and then combine the partial results of parallel execution.

```

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/parallel_foldl.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating parallel fold left

Reduction on GPUs
=================

Implementing reductions on GPUs requires a basic understanding of the :doc:`/understand/programming_model_reference`. The article explores aspects of low-level optimization best discussed through the :ref:`inherent_thread_model`, and as such will refrain from using Cooperative Groups.

Synchronizing parallel threads of execution across a GPU will be crucial for correctness; we can't start combining partial results before they manifest. Synchronizing _all_ the threads running on a GPU at any given time, while possible, is a costly and/or intricate operation. If synchronization is not absolutely necessary, map the parallel algorithm so that multi-processors and blocks can make independent progress and need not sync often.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementing reductions on GPUs requires a basic understanding of the :doc:`/understand/programming_model_reference`. The document explores aspects of low-level optimization best discussed through the :ref:`inherent_thread_model`, and refrains from using cooperative groups.

Synchronizing parallel threads of execution across a GPU is crucial for correctness as the partial results can't be synchronized before they manifest. Synchronizing all the threads running on a GPU at any given point of time is possible, however it is a costly and intricate operation. If synchronization is not absolutely necessary, map the parallel algorithm so that multiprocessors and blocks can make independent progress and need not sync frequently.

```

> 

Reviewer 2: You directly start with the points below. What are those points about? Mention what these are. Also, remove numbering if those points don't follow a sequence.

Author: Removed the numbering. These are optimization steps, but I think still unnecessary to have them.

1. Naive shared reduction
--------------------------

> The naive algorithm takes a tree-like shape, where the computational domain is purposefully distributed among Blocks. In all Blocks all threads participate in loading data from persistent (from the kernel's perspective) Global Memory into Shared Memory, performing the tree-like reduction for a single thread to write that partial result to Global in a location unique to the Block, allowing Block to make independent progress. Combining these partial results will happen in subsequent launches of the very same kernel until a scalar result is reached.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The naive algorithm takes a tree-like shape, where the computational domain is purposefully distributed among blocks. In all blocks, all threads participate in loading data from persistent (from the kernel's perspective) global memory into the shared memory. This helps to perform tree-like reduction for a single thread by writing the partial result to global, in a location unique to the block, which allows the block to make independent progress. The partial results are combined in subsequent launches of the same kernel until a scalar result is reached.
```

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/naive_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating naive reduction

This approach will require temporary storage based on the number of Blocks launched, as each will output a scalar partial result. Depending on whether it is valid to destroy the input, a second temporary storage may be needed, large enough to store the results of the second kernel launch, or one may simply reuse the storage of the larger than necessary original input; these implementations differ ever so slightly and the article will assume the input may be destroyed.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach requires temporary storage based on the number of blocks launched, as each block outputs a scalar partial result. Depending on the need to store or destroy the input, a second temporary storage might be needed, which could be large enough to store the results of the second kernel launch, or one can simply reuse the storage of the larger than necessary original input. These implementations differ so slightly that the document only considers the use case where the input could be destroyed.

```

.. code-block:: C++

    std::size_t factor = block_size; // block_size from hipGetDeviceProperties()
    auto new_size = [factor](const std::size_t actual)
    {
        // Every pass reduces input length by 'factor'. If actual size is not divisible by factor,
        // an extra output element is produced using some number of zero_elem inputs.
        return actual / factor + (actual % factor == 0 ? 0 : 1);
    };

> We'll be feeding ``zero_elem`` instances to threads that don't have unique inputs of their own. The backing of double-buffering is allocated is such:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For threads that don't have unique inputs of their own, feed ``zero_elem`` instances to threads. The backing of double-buffering is allocated is such:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    // Initialize host-side storage
    std::vector<unsigned> input(input_count);
    std::iota(input.begin(), input.end(), 0);

    // Initialize device-side storage
    unsigned *front,
             *back;
    hipMalloc((void**)&front, sizeof(unsigned) * input_count);
    hipMalloc((void**)&back,  sizeof(unsigned) * new_size(input_count));

    hipMemcpy(front, input.data(), input.size() * sizeof(unsigned), hipMemcpyHostToDevice);

Data is initialized on host and dispatched to the device. Then device-side reduction may commence. We omit swapping the double-buffer on the last iteration so the result is in the back-buffer no matter the input size.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data is initialized on the host and dispatched to the device followed by the commencement of device-side reduction. The swapping of the double-buffer on the last iteration is omitted, therefore the result is in the back-buffer irrespective of the input size.

```

.. code-block:: C++

    for (uint32_t curr = input_count; curr > 1;)
    {
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(
            kernel,
            dim3(new_size(curr)),
            dim3(block_size),
            factor * sizeof(unsigned),
            hipStreamDefault,
            front,
            back,
            kernel_op,
            zero_elem,
            curr);

        curr = new_size(curr);
        if (curr > 1)
            std::swap(front, back);
    }

This structure will persist throughout all the variations of reduction with slight modifications to ``factor`` and shared memory allocation, but primarily the kernel itself:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This structure persists in the kernel throughout all the variations of reduction with slight modifications to ``factor`` and shared memory allocation:

```

        };

        const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                    bid = blockIdx.x,
                    gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;

        // Read input from front buffer to shared
        shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
        __syncthreads();

        // Shared reduction
        for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
        {
            if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
                shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
            __syncthreads();
        }

        // Write result from shared to back buffer
        if (tid == 0)
            back[bid] = shared[0];
    }

While the ``tid % (2 * i) == 0`` indexing scheme yields correct results, it will also result in high thread divergence. Thread divergence is when threads in a warp/wavefront diverge, meaning they'd have to execute different instructions on a given clock cycle. This manifests easiest using ``if/else`` branches like here, but among others could also manifest as thread id dependent ``for`` loop lengths. Even though there are less and less active threads participating in the reduction, warps remain active (at least one lane in a warp hits the ``if`` branch) for longer than necessary.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the ``tid % (2 * i) == 0`` indexing scheme yields correct results, it also leads to high thread divergence. Thread divergence indicates the event when the threads in a warp or wavefront diverge, which implies that the threads have to execute different instructions in a given clock cycle. This is easily manifested using ``if-else`` statements as shown here, but can also be manifested as ``for`` loop dependent on thread id lengths. Even though the number of active threads participating in the reduction reduces, warps remain active for longer than necessary, as at least one lane in a warp hits the ``if`` statement.

```

2. Reducing thread divergence
-----------------------------

You can reduce divergence by keeping dataflow between memory addresses identical but reassigning the thread ids.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/reduced_divergence_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating reduced divergence reduction

.. note::

    For those less proficient in reading Git diffs, the following code segments show changes between versions of a file. Lines highlighted in red are removed or changed while lines highlighted green are being introduced.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For those less proficient in reading Git diffs, the following code segments show changes between the two versions of a file. Lines highlighted in red are being removed or changed while lines highlighted in green are being introduced.

```

.. code-block:: diff

    // Shared reduction
    for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
    {
    -    if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
    -        shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
    +    if (uint32_t j = 2 * i * tid; j < blockDim.x)
    +        shared[j] = op(shared[j], shared[j + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }

This way inactive threads start accumulating uniformly toward the higher thread id index range and may uniformly skip to ``__syncthreads()``. This however introduces a new issue: bank conflicts.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way inactive threads start accumulating uniformly towards the higher thread id index range and might uniformly skip to ``__syncthreads()``. However, this introduces a bank conflicts issue.

```

3. Resolving bank conflicts
---------------------------

Shared memory on both AMD and NVIDIA is implemented in hardware by storage which is organized into banks of various sizes. On AMD hardware the name of this hardware element is LDS, Local Data Share. On NVIDIA hardware it's implemented using the same silicon as the L1 data cache. A truthful mental model of shared memory is to think of it as a striped 2-dimensional range of memory.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both AMD and NVIDIA implement shared memory in the hardware by organizing storage into banks of various sizes. On the AMD hardware, this hardware element is known as Local Data Share (LDS). On NVIDIA hardware, it's implemented using the same silicon as the L1 data cache. You can think of shared memory  as a striped 2-dimensional range of memory.

```

> SHARED MEMORY BANKS IMAGE

Reviewer 2: Is this a heading?

Author: Fixed.

Shared memory bank count, width and depth depend on the architecture at hand. A bank conflict occurs when different threads in a warp/wavefront access the same bank in the same operation. In this case, the "hardware prevents the attempted concurrent accesses to the same bank by turning them into serial accesses".

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shared memory bank's count, width, and depth depend on the architecture. A bank conflict occurs when different threads in a warp or wavefront access the same bank during the same operation. In this case, the hardware prevents the attempted concurrent accesses to the same bank by converting them into serial accesses.

```

- `"AMD Instinct MI200" Instruction Set Architecture, Chapter 11.1 <https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/instinct-tech-docs/instruction-set-architectures/instinct-mi200-cdna2-instruction-set-architecture.pdf>`_
- `"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture, Chapter 10.1 <https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/radeon-tech-docs/instruction-set-architectures/rdna2-shader-instruction-set-architecture.pdf>`_

A notable exception is when the shared read uniformly evaluates to the same address across the entire warp/wavefront turning it into a broadcast. A better change naive implementation is to have not only the activity of threads form continuous ranges but their memory accesses too.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A notable exception is when the shared read uniformly broadcasts to the same address across the entire warp or wavefront. A better implementation of the naive algorithm is to form continuous ranges of the threads activities and their memory accesses.

```

.. code-block:: diff

    // Shared reduction
    -for (uint32_t i = 1; i < blockDim.x; i *= 2)
    -{
    -    if (tid % (2 * i) == 0)
    +for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i != 0; i /= 2)
    +{
    +    if (tid < i)
            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/conflict_free_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating bank conflict free reduction

.. note::

    It is easiest to avoid bank conflicts if one can read shared memory in a coalesced manner, meaning reads/writes of each lane in a warp evaluate to consequtive locations. Additional requirements must be met detailed more thoroughly in the linked ISA documents, but having simple read/write patterns help reason about bank conflicts.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To avoid bank conflicts, read shared memory in a coalesced manner, which implies that reads/writes of each lane in a warp evaluate to consecutive locations. Analyzing the read/write patterns could help you to understand the cause of bank conflicts. For more details, refer to the linked ISA documents (add link).

```

4. Utilize upper half of the block
----------------------------------

> The previous implementation was free of low-level GPGPU-specific anti-patterns, however it does still exhibit a few common shortcomings. The loop performing the reduction in shared memory starts from ``i = blockDim.x / 2`` and the first predicate ``if (tid < i)`` immediately disables half of our block which only helped load the data into shared. We change the kernel:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The preceding implementation is free of low-level GPU-specific anti-patterns, however it still exhibits some common shortcomings. The loop performing the reduction in the shared memory starts from ``i = blockDim.x / 2`` and the first predicate ``if (tid < i)`` immediately disables half of the block, which only helps load the data into the shared memory. You can change the kernel along with the calculation of ``factor`` on the host, as shown here:
```

.. code-block:: diff

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                bid = blockIdx.x,
    -              gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;
    +              gid = bid * (blockDim.x * 2) + tid;

    // Read input from front buffer to shared
    -shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
    +shared[tid] = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));
    __syncthreads();

> and the calculation of ``factor`` on the host as well.

Reviewer 2: Remove this.

Author: Fixed.

By eliminating half of the threads and giving meaningful work to all the threads by unconditionally performing a binary ``op``, we don't waste half of our threads.

While global memory is read in a coalesced fashion which the memory controller prefers, we're still some ways from optimal performance, hinting at being limited by instruction throughput.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By eliminating half of the threads and giving meaningful work to all the threads by performing an unconditional binary ``op``, you can prevent wastage of half of the threads.

Even though global memory is read in a coalesced fashion, as preferred by the memory controller, optimal performance is still limited by the instruction throughput.

```

Author: Information changed. Fix partially with the suggestion. @SwRaw please check.

Reviewer 2: What information changed? I can only see the old information. I have reapplied the suggestion.

Author: My bad.

5. Omit superfluous synchronization
-----------------------------------

Warps/Wavefronts are known to execute in a strictly lockstep fashion, therefore once shared reduction has reached a point when it's only a single warp participating meaningfully, we can cut short the loop and let the rest of the warps terminate, moreover without the need for syncing the entire block, we can also unroll the loop.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Warps or wavefronts are known to execute in a strictly lockstep fashion, therefore once shared reduction reaches a point where only a single warp participates meaningfully, you can cut short the loop and let the rest of the warps terminate. Moreover, you can also unroll the loop without syncing the entire block.

```

> The ``tmp`` namespace used beyond this point in the chapter holds a handful of template meta-programmed utilities to facilitate writing flexible _and_ optimal code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``tmp`` namespace used beyond this point in this document holds a handful of template meta-programmed utilities to facilitate writing flexible and optimal code.
```

> :code:`tmp::static_for` is a variation of the language :code:`for` loop where the running index is a compile-time constant and is eligible for use in compile-time evaluated contexts not just constant folding within the optimizer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:code:`tmp::static_for` is not just a constant folding within the optimizer but a variation of the language :code:`for` loop, where the running index is a compile-time constant and is eligible for use in compile-time evaluated contexts.
```
Is :code:`tmp::static_for` supposed to be clickable?

Author: I think it should be not clickable.

        mov     rdi, rbx
        mov     esi, 1
        xor     eax, eax
        call    printf@PLT
        mov     rdi, rbx
        mov     esi, 2
        xor     eax, eax
        call    printf@PLT
        mov     rdi, rbx
        mov     esi, 3
        xor     eax, eax
        call    printf@PLT
        xor     eax, eax
        pop     rbx
        ret
    .L.str:
        .asciz  "%d"

**GCC**

.. code-block:: asm

    .LC0:
        .string "%d"
    main:
        push    rbx
        xor     ebx, ebx
    .L2:
        mov     esi, ebx
        mov     edi, OFFSET FLAT:.LC0
        xor     eax, eax
        add     ebx, 1
        call    printf
        cmp     ebx, 4
        jne     .L2
        xor     eax, eax
        pop     rbx
        ret

**MSVC**

.. code-block::

    main    PROC
        $LN12:
        push    rbx
        sub     rsp, 32
        xor     ebx, ebx
        npad    8
    $LL4@main:
        mov     edx, ebx
        lea     rcx, OFFSET FLAT:'string'
        call    printf
        inc     ebx
        cmp     ebx, 4
        jl      SHORT $LL4@main
        xor     eax, eax
        add     rsp, 32
        pop     rbx
        ret     0
    main    ENDP

> LLVM unrolls the the loop and compiles to a flat series of ``printf`` invocations while GCC and MSVC both agree to keep the loop intact, visible from the compare (``cmp``) and the jump (``jne``, ``jl``) instructions. LLVM code generation is identical to us having written the unrolled loop manually:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LLVM unrolls the loop and compiles to a flat series of ``printf`` invocations, while both GCC and MSVC keep the loop intact, as visible from the compare (``cmp``) and the jump (``jne``, ``jl``) instructions. LLVM code generation is identical to manually writing the unrolled loop:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    printf("%d", 0);
    printf("%d", 1);
    printf("%d", 2);
    printf("%d", 3);

While there are various non-standard pragmas available to hint or force the compiler to unroll the loop, we instead use template meta-programming to force feed the compiler the unrolled loop.

.. code-block:: C++

    constexpr int size = 4;

    // Maybe unrolled loop
    for (int i = 0 ; i < size ; ++i)
    {
        printf("%d", i);
    }

    // Force unrolled loop
    using namespace tmp;
    static_for<0, less_than<size>, increment<1>>([]<int i>()
    {
        printf("%d", i);
    });

> The most notable difference in structure is that in the language ``for`` loop we start by giving the loop variable a name, while in our ``static_for`` utility we give it a name at the end. An important bonus is that in the body of the loop we can use the running index ``i`` in contexts requiring constant expressions: as template arguments or inside ``if constexpr``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most notable structural difference is that in the language ``for`` loop, the loop variable is given a name in the beginning, while in the ``static_for`` utility, the loop variable is given a name in the end. An important bonus is that in the body of the loop, you can use the running index ``i`` in contexts requiring constant expressions such as template arguments or inside ``if constexpr``.
```

:code:`tmp::static_switch` takes run-time value and run-time dispatches to a range set of tabulated functions where said value is a compile-time constant and is eligible for use in compile-time evaluated contexts.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:code:`tmp::static_switch` takes runtime value and runtime dispatches to a range of set of tabulated functions, where said value is a compile-time constant and is eligible for use in compile-time evaluated contexts.

```

Consider the following code:

.. code-block:: C++

    int warp_size = device_props.warpSize;
    switch (warp_size)
    {
    case 32:
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(kernel<32>, ...);
        break;
    case 64:
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(kernel<64>, ...);
        break;
    }

This all works fine as long as one doesn't commit copy-paste errors, as we had to repeat the possible values of ``warp_size`` our code is prepared to handle. This is what ``tmp::static_switch`` helps us with. The above is morally equivalent to:

> 

Reviewer 2: I can't understand this statement. Can you work a bit on this.

> This all works fine as long as one doesn't commit copy-paste errors, as we had to repeat the possible values of ``warp_size`` our code is prepared to handle. This is what ``tmp::static_switch`` helps us with. The above is morally equivalent to:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the preceding code, note the code repetition for all possible values of ``warp_size``, the code is prepared to handle. To avoid this, use ``tmp::static_switch``, as shown:

```

.. code-block:: C++

    tmp::static_switch<std::array{32, 64}>(warp_size, [&]<int WarpSize>()
    {
        hipLaunchKernelGGL(kernel<WarpSize>, ...);
    });

.. code-block:: diff

    -template<typename T, typename F>
    +template<uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    __global__ void kernel(
        ...
    )
    {
        ...
    // Shared reduction
    -for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i != 0; i /= 2)
    +for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i > WarpSize; i /= 2)
    {
        if (tid < i)
            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
        __syncthreads();
    }
    +// Warp reduction
    +tmp::static_for<WarpSize, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int I>()
    +{
    +    if (tid < I)
    +        shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + I]);
    +#ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_NVIDIA__
    +    __syncwarp(0xffffffff >> (WarpSize - I));
    +#endif
    +});

> Because HIP typically targets hardware with warp sizes of 32 (NVIDIA GPUs and RDNA AMD GPUs) as well as of 64 (CDNA AMD GPUs), portable HIP code must handle both. That is why instead of assuming a warp size of 32 we make that a template argument of the kernel, allowing us to unroll the final loop using ``tmp::static_for`` in a parametric way but still having the code read much like an ordinary loop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because HIP typically targets hardware with warp sizes of 32 (NVIDIA GPUs and RDNA AMD GPUs) and 64 (CDNA AMD GPUs), portable HIP code must handle both. That is why instead of assuming a warp size of 32, make the warp size a template argument of the kernel. This allows you to unroll the final loop using ``tmp::static_for`` in a parametric way but still having the code read much like an ordinary loop.
```

> Promoting the warp/wavefront size to being a compile-time constant means we have to do the same promotion on the host-side as well. We'll sandwich our kernel launch with ``tmp::static_switch``, promoting the snake-case run-time ``warp_size`` variable to a camel-case compile-time constant ``WarpSize``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Promoting the warp or wavefront size to being a compile-time constant also requires you to handle it similarly on the host-side as well. You can sandwich the kernel launch with ``tmp::static_switch``, promoting the snake-case run-time ``warp_size`` variable to a camel-case compile-time constant ``WarpSize``.
```

.. code-block:: diff

    // Device-side reduction
    for (uint32_t curr = input_count; curr > 1;)
    {
    +    tmp::static_range_switch<std::array{32, 64}>(warp_size, [&]<int WarpSize>() noexcept
    +    {
            hipLaunchKernelGGL(
    -            kernel,
    +            kernel<WarpSize>,
                dim3(new_size(curr)),
                dim3(block_size),
                factor * sizeof(unsigned),
                hipStreamDefault,
                front,
                back,
                kernel_op,
                zero_elem,
                curr);
    +    });
        ...
    }

.. note::

    Neither RDNA nor CDNA based AMD hardware provide independent progress guarantees to lanes of the same wavefront. Lanes of a warp when targeting NVIDIA hardware may execute somewhat independently, so long as the programmer assists the compiler using dedicated built-in functions. (A feature called Independent Thread Scheduling.) The HIP headers do not expose the necessary warp primitives and their overloads.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Neither RDNA- nor CDNA-based AMD hardware provides guaranteed independent progress to lanes of the same wavefront.  When targeting NVIDIA hardware, lanes of a warp might execute somewhat independently as long as the programmer assists the compiler using dedicated built-in functions. This feature is called Independent Thread Scheduling. The HIP headers don't expose the necessary warp primitives and their overloads.

```

>     Portable applications can still tap into this feature with carefully ``#ifdef`` -ed code, but in this particular optimization level it's a requirement. The code implicitly relies on the lockstep behavior of a wavefront, but warps do not share this property. We have to synchronize all the active lanes of a warp to avoid a data race by some lanes progressing faster than others in the same warp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Portable applications can still tap into this feature with carefully ``#ifdef`` -ed code, but at this particular optimization level, it's a requirement. The code implicitly relies on the lockstep behavior of a wavefront, but warps don't share this property. You must synchronize all the active lanes of a warp to avoid a data race with some lanes progressing faster than others in the same warp.
```

6. Unroll all loops
-------------------

While the previous step primarily aimed for removing the unnecessary syncing only, it also went ahead and unrolled the end of the loop. We could however force unrolling the first part of the loop as well. This saves a few scalar registers (values the compiler can prove to be uniform across warps/wavefronts).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the previous step primarily aims at removing the unnecessary syncing, it also additionally unrolls the end of the loop. However, you could also force unrolling the first part of the loop. This saves a few scalar registers (values the compiler can prove to be uniform across warps or wavefronts).

```

.. code-block:: diff

    -template<uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    -__global__ void kernel(
    +template<uint32_t BlockSize, uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    +__global__ __launch_bounds__(BlockSize) void kernel(
        T* front,
        T* back,
        F op,
        T zero_elem,
        uint32_t front_size)
    {
    -    extern __shared__ T shared[];
    +    __shared__ T shared[BlockSize];

        ...

        // Shared reduction
    -    for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i > WarpSize; i /= 2)
    +    tmp::static_for<BlockSize / 2, tmp::greater_than<WarpSize>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int I>()
        {
    -        if (tid < i)
    -            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + i]);
    +        if (tid < I)
    +            shared[tid] = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + I]);
            __syncthreads();
        }
    +    );

There are two notable changes beyond introducing yet another template argument for the kernel and the moving from ``for`` to ``tmp::static_for``:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introducing yet another template argument for the kernel and moving from ``for`` to ``tmp::static_for`` leads to the following two notable improvements:

```

Author: Information changed

- We've added a new attribute to our kernel: ``__launch_bounds__(BlockSize)`` This attribute instructs the compiler that the kernel will only be launched using the designated block size. (Launches of differing block sizes will fail.) This allows the optimizer to enroll the ``blockDim.x`` variable in constant folding as well better reason about register pressure/usage.

> - Turning the block size into a compile-time constant allows us to statically allocate shared memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Introducing new attribute ``__launch_bounds__(BlockSize)`` to the kernel instructs the compiler that the kernel will only be launched using the designated block size. This implies that the launches of differing block sizes will fail. This allows the optimizer to enroll the ``blockDim.x`` variable in constant folding as well as get information about register usage.
- Turning the block size into a compile-time constant allows you to statically allocate the shared memory.
```

7. Communicate using warp-collective functions
----------------------------------------------

> Shared memory provides us with a fast communication path within a block, but when performing reduction within the last warp/wavefront, we have an even faster communication means at our disposal: warp-collective or cross-lane functions. Instead of using the hardware backing shared memory we can directly copy between the local memory (the registers) of each lane in a warp/wavefront. The family of functions that allow us to do this are the shuffle functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shared memory provides a fast communication path within a block, however when performing reduction within the last warp or wavefront, you can use faster means of communication, which is warp-collective or cross-lane functions. Instead of using the hardware-backed shared memory, you can directly copy between the local memory (registers) of each lane in a warp or wavefront. This can be achieve using the shuffle functions.
```

We'll be using ``__shfl_down()``, one of the most restrictive but also most structured communication schemes.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See how to use ``__shfl_down()``, which is one of the most restrictive but also the most structured communication schemes.

```

.. code-block:: C++

    // Warp reduction
    if (tid < WarpSize)
    {
        T res = op(shared[tid], shared[tid + WarpSize]);
        tmp::static_for<WarpSize / 2, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int Delta>()
        {
            res = op(res, __shfl_down(res, Delta));
        });

        // Write result from shared to back buffer
        if (tid == 0)
            back[bid] = res;
    }

Moving to using warp-collective functions for communication means that control flow has to be uniform across warps, much like the name warp-collective implies. Therefore we externalized the thread id check outside the loop. (Write out of the result moved inside due to variable scoping.)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using warp-collective functions for communication requires the control flow to be uniform across warps, as the name warp-collective implies. Therefore, you can see that the thread id is being checked outside the loop, but the result is written inside due to variable scoping.

```

8. Prefer warp communication over shared
----------------------------------------

> As mentioned in the prior step, communication between local memory is faster than shared. Instead of relying on it solely at the end of the tree-like reduction, it is possible to turn the tree reduction "inside out" and perform multiple parallel warp reductions in parallel starting with all threads are active, and communicate only their partial results through shared.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the previous step, communication between local memory is faster than shared memory. Instead of relying on the local memory only at the end of the tree-like reduction, it is a better approach to turn the tree reduction "inside out" and perform multiple warp reductions in parallel. This starts with all the active threads communicating only their partial results through the shared memory.
```

Author: Information changed.

Author: Changed slighty the suggestion. @SwRaw Please check.

Reviewer 2: You have changed 
"This starts with all the active threads communicating only their partial results through the shared memory."
to
"This starts with all the active threads, then communicating only their partial results through the shared memory."
I think we both misunderstood the information. Let's change it to:

Instead of relying on the local memory only at the end of the tree-like reduction, it is a better approach to turn the tree reduction inside out and perform multiple warp reductions in parallel on all active threads, thus communicating only their partial results through the shared memory.

Author: OK. Pushed your suggestion.

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/warp_reduction.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating warp reduction

.. figure:: ../data/tutorial/reduction/warp_reduction_with_shared.svg
  :alt: Diagram demonstrating warp reduction and results store in shared memory

This version of the kernel differs significantly enough to not describe through a diff but afresh.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kernel versions differ significantly enough to be described using a diff; use afresh instead.

```

.. code-block:: C++

    template<uint32_t BlockSize, uint32_t WarpSize, typename T, typename F>
    __global__ __launch_bounds__(BlockSize) void kernel(
        T* front,
        T* back,
        F op,
        T zero_elem,
        uint32_t front_size)
    {
        // ...
    }

The kernel signature looks the same, the factor of reduction is the same as in previous cases, only the implementation differs.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kernel signature and the reduction factor are the same as in previous cases; only the implementation differs.

```

.. code-block:: C++

    static constexpr uint32_t WarpCount = BlockSize / WarpSize;

    __shared__ T shared[WarpCount];

    auto read_global_safe =
        [&](const uint32_t i) { return i < front_size ? front[i] : zero_elem; };
    auto read_shared_safe =
        [&](const uint32_t i) { return i < WarpCount ? shared[i] : zero_elem; };

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                bid = blockIdx.x,
                gid = bid * (blockDim.x * 2) + tid,
                wid = tid / WarpSize,
                lid = tid % WarpSize;

    // Read input from front buffer to local
    T res = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));

Because we communicate the results of warps through shared, we'll need as many elements in shared as warps within out block. Much like we could only launch kernels at block granularity to begin with, we can only warp reduce with ``WarpSize`` granularity (due to the collective nature of the cross-lane built-ins), hence we introduce ``read_shared_safe`` to pad overindexing by reading ``zero_elem`` -s. Reading from global remains unchanged.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we communicate the results of warps through shared memory, same number of elements are required in the shared memory as warps within the block. Similar to how you can only launch kernels at block granularity, you can only warp reduce with ``WarpSize`` granularity due to the collective nature of the cross-lane builtins. To address this, you can use ``read_shared_safe`` to pad overindexing by reading ``zero_elem``. Reading from global remains unaffected.

```

            tmp::not_equal<1>,
            tmp::divide_ceil<WarpSize>,
            tmp::constant<0>>>([&]<uint32_t ActiveWarps>()
    {
        if(wid < ActiveWarps)
        {
            // Warp reduction
            tmp::static_for<WarpSize / 2, tmp::not_equal<0>, tmp::divide<2>>([&]<int Delta>()
            {
                res = op(res, __shfl_down(res, Delta));
            });

            // Write warp result from local to shared
            if(lid == 0)
                shared[wid] = res;
        }
        __syncthreads();

        // Read warp result from shared to local
        res = read_shared_safe(tid);
    });

    // Write result from local to back buffer
    if(tid == 0)
        back[bid] = res;

``ActiveWarps`` goes from ``WarpCount`` until it reaches ``0``, every iteration the number of active warps reduces ``WarpSize``. To deal with cases when the partial result count isn't a divisor of ``ActiveWarps`` and we need to launch an extra warp, we're using ``tmp::divide_ceil`` which always rounds to positive infinity. We need the tertiary ``tmp::select``, because such division never reaches ``0``, so we must terminate the loop after once the last warp concluded.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``ActiveWarps`` iterates from ``WarpCount`` until it reaches ``0``. Every iteration of ``ActiveWarps`` reduces the ``WarpSize``. In cases where the partial result count isn't a divisor of ``ActiveWarps`` and you need to launch an extra warp, use ``tmp::divide_ceil``, which always rounds to positive infinity. You need the tertiary ``tmp::select``, because such division never reaches ``0``, so you must terminate the loop after the last warp concludes.

```

In each iteration if the warp is active (has at least a single valid input) it carries out a pass of warp reduction and writes output based on warp id. Reading is based thread id. Global output is still based on block id.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In each iteration, if the warp is active, which means that it has at least a single valid input, it carries out a pass of warp reduction and writes output based on warp id. Reading is carried out based on thread id. Global output continues to be based on block id.

```

9. Amortize bookkeeping variable overhead
-----------------------------------------

We have touched upon reducing register usage as a means of improving occupancy, meaning allowing more blocks to execute in parallel on all Multi Processors allowing more global store/load latency to be hidden. By reducing the number of kernels in flight but still carrying out the same workload, we allow wasting less registers on loading and maintaining bookkeeping variables such as kernel indices.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous sections explained how to reduce register usage to improve occupancy, which allows more blocks to execute in parallel on all multiprocessors, leading to reduced global store and load latency. Reducing the number of kernels in flight while still carrying out the same workload reduces wastage of registers while loading and maintaining bookkeeping variables such as kernel indices.

```

Author: Information changed.

Author: Fixed in a different way. @SwRaw please check.

One optimization we already did somewhat unknowingly in this direction was when we performed one binary ``op`` while loading input from global. Do not let the syntax fool you, there's no such thing as carrying out said operation "in flight", the two values are loaded into local memory (registers) then ``op`` gets called.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example of this optimization is performing one binary ``op`` while loading input from global. Even though the operation is said to be carried out "in flight", the two values are loaded into local memory (registers) before ``op`` is called.

```

Author: Information changed.

A more general form of this optimization is wrapping most of the kernel logic with loops which all carry out the workload of multiple kernel instances but require storing only a single instance of most of the bookkeeping logic. In code we will refer to this multiplicity factor via the ``ItemsPerThread`` compile-time constant, supplied by a template argument to allow for loop unrolling.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A more general form of this optimization is wrapping most of the kernel logic in loops that carry out the workload of multiple kernel instances but require storing only a single instance of most of the bookkeeping logic. In code, this multiplicity factor is referred to via the ``ItemsPerThread`` compile-time constant, which is supplied by a template argument to allow for loop unrolling.

```

This kernel variant will utilize another utility which is generally applicable: ``hip::static_array`` is a more restrictive wrapper over the built-in array than ``std::array``, as it only allows indexing only compile-time constants using the usual tuple-like ``template <size_t I> auto get<I>(...)`` interface.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This kernel variant utilizes another generally applicable utility known as ``hip::static_array``, which is a more restrictive wrapper over the builtin array than ``std::array``, as it allows indexing only compile-time constants using the usual tuple-like ``template <size_t I> auto get<I>(...)`` interface.

```

.. note::

>     This is important, because on a GPU there is no stack, but local memory is provisioned from the register file and this provisioning happens statically. To paraphrase, the address range of a thread's local memory is determined at compile time. When an array is defined and used in local storage, the compiler can only maintain its storage in the register file as long as all access to the array is computable by the compiler at compile-time. It need not strictly be a compile-time constant, if through constant folding or some other means the compiler can resolve the addresses of the accesses. However, if it cannot, the array will be backed by global memory (indicated by allocating a non-zero number of spill registers observable using static analysis tools) which is multiple orders of magnitude slower. ``hip::static_array`` via its ``hip::get<>`` interface guarantees that no such spills will occur.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On a GPU, there is no stack and the local memory is provisioned from the register file; this provisioning takes place statically. To paraphrase, the address range of a thread's local memory is determined at compile-time. When an array is defined and used in the local storage, the compiler can only maintain its storage in the register file as long as all accesses to the array are computable by the compiler at compile-time. It doesn't strictly need to be a compile-time constant as long as the compiler can resolve the addresses of the accesses through constant folding or some other means. If the compiler fails to do so, the array will be backed by global memory, which is indicated by allocating a non-zero number of spill registers observable using static analysis tools, however this is slower by magnitude of multiple order. ``hip::static_array`` via its ``hip::get<>`` interface ensures that no such spills occur.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    template<uint32_t BlockSize, uint32_t WarpSize, uint32_t ItemsPerThread>
    __global__ static __launch_bounds__(BlockSize) void kernel(...)

Our kernel as promised now has three compile-time configurable parameters. The only part of the kernel that changes is how we load data from global and how we perform the binary operation on those loaded values. What used to be the one-liner:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kernel has three compile-time configurable parameters now. The only part of the kernel that changes depends on how you load data from global and perform the binary operation on those loaded values. So, the following step to read input from front buffer to global is now split into two steps: :ref:`reading ``ItemsPerThread`` <reading-items>`and :ref:`processing ``ItemsPerThread`` <processing-items>`.
```

.. code-block:: C++

    // Read input from front buffer to local
    T res = op(read_global_safe(gid), read_global_safe(gid + blockDim.x));

> is going to be split now to a reading and a processing step.

Reviewer 2: remove this line

Author: fixed.

> 

Reviewer 2: .. _reading-items:

Author: fixed.

Reading ``ItemsPerThread``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The change to reading is going to happen inside `read_global_safe`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The change to reading happens inside `read_global_safe`:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    auto read_global_safe = [&](const int32_t i) -> hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>
    {
        return [&]<int32_t... I>(std::integer_sequence<int32_t, I...>)
        {
            if(i + ItemsPerThread < front_size)
                return hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>{
                    front[i + I]...
                };
            else
                return hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread>{
                    (i + I < front_size ? front[i + I] : zero_elem)...
                };
        }(std::make_integer_sequence<int32_t, ItemsPerThread>());
    };

> What's happening here? Without the flexibility of a configurable ``ItemsPerThread`` property, we'd want to load each array element one after the other, morally equivalent to:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that each array element is being loaded consecutively without the flexibility of a configurable ``ItemsPerThread`` property. This is morally equivalent to:

```

.. code-block:: C++

    T arr[4] = {
        front[gid + 0],
        front[gid + 1],
        front[gid + 2],
        front[gid + 3]
    }

> This is exactly what's happening in the ``front[i + I]...`` fold-expression. There is a condition though: we only issue this if the entire read is operating on real input and it's not padding using ``zero_elem``. If some reads would overindex the input, the read turns into:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is exactly what's happening in the ``front[i + I]...`` fold-expression. However, this can only be issued if the entire read is operating on real input without padding using ``zero_elem``. If some reads over-index the input, the read turns into:

```

.. code-block:: C++

    T arr[4] = {
        i + 0 < front_size ? front[i + 0] : zero_elem,
        i + 1 < front_size ? front[i + 1] : zero_elem,
        i + 2 < front_size ? front[i + 2] : zero_elem,
        i + 3 < front_size ? front[i + 3] : zero_elem
    }

> Why do we do this? Because we want to make it easier for the compiler to recognize vector loads from global. Because our performance at large is dominated by how we move our data, as we've seen by the huge performance improvement when we moved to loading two values per thread, it's only natural we wish to utilize dedicated instructions to moving more data with less binary. See `here <https://godbolt.org/z/b36Eea69q>`_ how loading for AMD (both RDNA and CDNA) compiles to ``global_load_dwordx4`` where ``x4`` denotes the 4-vector variant of the instruction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is performed to make it easier for the compiler to recognize vector loads from global. As the performance at large is dominated by how you move the data, it's only natural to utilize dedicated instructions to move more data with less binary. This is evident by the huge performance improvement when loading two values per thread, See `the compiler explorer <https://godbolt.org/z/b36Eea69q>`_ to learn how loading for AMD (both RDNA and CDNA) compiles to ``global_load_dwordx4``, where ``x4`` denotes the 4-vector variant of the instruction.
```

.. note::

>     Eagle eyed readers may have noticed that ``read_global_safe`` used to take an ``uint32_t`` as the index type and now it takes a signed integer. When indexing an array with unsigned integrals, the compiler has to handle integer overflows as they're defined by the C/C++ standards. It may happen, that some part of the vector load indices overflow, thus not resulting in a contiguous read. If you change the previously linked code to use an unsigned integral as the thread id, the compiler won't emit a vector load. Signed integer overflow is undefined behavior, and the optimizer assumes that a program has none in it. To convey the absence of overflow to the compiler with unsigned indices, add ``__builtin_assume(gid + 4 > gid)``, or the more portable ``[[assume]](gid + 4 > gid)`` once ``amdclang++`` supports it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that ``read_global_safe`` that used to take an ``uint32_t`` as the index type, takes a signed integer now. When indexing an array with unsigned integers, the compiler has to handle integer overflows, as they're defined by the C/C++ standards. It might happen, that some part of the vector load indices overflow, thus resulting in a non-contiguous read. If you change the previously linked code to use an unsigned integer as the thread id, the compiler won't emit a vector load. Signed integer overflow is an undefined behavior, and hence unknown to the optimizer. To convey the absence of overflow to the compiler with unsigned indices, add ``__builtin_assume(gid + 4 > gid)``, or the more portable ``[[assume]](gid + 4 > gid)``, once ``amdclang++`` supports it.
```

To conclude ``read_global_safe``'s implementation, it's an IILE (Immediately Invoked Lambda Expression), because ``ItemsPerThread`` is an integral value, but we need a compile-time ``iota``-like sequence of integers _as a ``pack_`` for our fold-expression to expand on, that change can only occur as part of template argument deduction, here on the immediately invoked template lambda.

> 

Reviewer 2: .. _processing-items:

Author: fixed.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``read_global_safe`` implementation is an Immediately Invoked Lambda Expression (IILE), because ``ItemsPerThread`` is an integer value, while you need a compile-time ``iota``-like sequence of integers as a pack for the fold-expressions to expand on. This can only take place as part of template argument deduction on the IILE.

```

Processing ``ItemsPerThread``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once the kernel reads ``ItemsPerThread`` number of inputs to local, it will immediately reduce them to a scalar. There is no reason to propagate the input element multiplicity to the warp reduction phase; cross-lane shuffles are cheap, no shuffling is even cheaper.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the kernel reads ``ItemsPerThread`` number of inputs to local, it immediately reduces them to a scalar. There is no reason to propagate the input element multiplicity to the warp reduction phase; cross-lane shuffles are cheaper that any other shuffling.

```

Author: The information changed here.

Author: Fixed in a different way. @SwRaw please check.

Reviewer 2: You have removed "cross-lane shuffles are cheaper than any other shuffling."
I guess, we should keep it. Take a call. ( By mistake I wrote cheaper that..it should be cheaper than)

Author: Let's go without the last part.

.. code-block:: C++

    T res = [&]()
    {
        // Read input from front buffer to local
        hip::static_array<T, ItemsPerThread> arr = read_global_safe(gid);

        // Reduce ItemsPerThread to scalar
        tmp::static_for<1, tmp::less_than<ItemsPerThread>, tmp::increment<1>>([&]<int I>()
        {
            get<0>(arr) = op(get<0>(arr), get<I>(arr));
        });

        return get<0>(arr);
    }();

Outlook
^^^^^^^

> There are multiple ways one could take optimization further.

Reviewer 2: Do we even need this section? It doesn't seem to serve any purpose.

Author: Removed.

10. Two-pass reduction
----------------------

Alter kernel launch and input fetching such that no more blocks are launched than what a subsequent kernel launch's single block can conveniently reduce, while performing multiple passes of input reading from global (and combine their) results before engaging in the end-game tree-like reduction.

> With this method, one can save 1-2 kernel launches for really large inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alter kernel launch and input fetching such that no more blocks are launched than what a subsequent kernel launch's single block can conveniently reduce, while performing multiple passes of input reading from global and combining their results before engaging in the end game tree-like reduction.

With this method, you can save at least one to two kernel launches for really large inputs.
```

> 11. Global Data Share

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11. Global data share
```

---------------------

.. warning::

    This modification can only be executed on AMD hardware.

Perform the first step of the two-pass reduction, but at the end, instead of writing to global and reading it back in a subsequent kernel, write the partial results to the Global Data Share (aka. GDS). This is an ``N+1`` th shared memory which all Multi Processors can access and is also on-chip memory.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Perform the first step of the two-pass reduction, but in the end, instead of writing to global and reading it back in a subsequent kernel, write the partial results to the Global Data Share (GDS). This is an ``N+1`` th shared memory that is accessed by all multiprocessors and is also on-chip memory.

```

.. note::

    The order in which blocks are scheduled isn't guaranteed by the API, even though all GPUs in existence schedule them the same way, monotonically increasing in their block id. Relying on this implicitly, the last block of a grid is in the optimal position to observe the side-effects of all other blocks (using spinlocks, or anything else) without occupying a Multi Processor for longer than necessary.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The order in which blocks are scheduled isn't guaranteed by the API, even though all GPUs schedule them in the same monotonically increasing order of block ids. Relying on this implicitly, the last block of a grid is in the optimal position to observe the side-effects of all other blocks (using spinlocks or other methods) without occupying a multiprocessor for longer than necessary.

```

Without launching a second kernel, have the last block collect the results of all other blocks from GDS (either implicitly exploiting the scheduling behavior or relying on Global Wave Sync, yet another AMD-specific feature) to merge them for a final tree-like reduction.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without launching a second kernel, you can make the last block collect the results of all other blocks from GDS by either implicitly exploiting the scheduling behavior or relying on another AMD-specific feature called Global Wave Sync (GWS) to merge them for a final tree-like reduction.

```

.. note::

    Both GDS and GWS aren't covered by the HIP API but reserved features of the runtime. Invoking these functionalities currently requires inline AMDGCN assembly. Furthermore because the GDS isn't virtualized by the runtime imposing further restrictions on concurrent scheduling of other kernels.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Both GDS and GWS are reserved features of the runtime that aren't covered by the HIP API. Invoking these functionalities currently requires inline AMDGCN assembly. Moreover, the fact that the GDS isn't virtualized by the runtime, imposes further restrictions on concurrent scheduling of other kernels.

```

Conclusion
==========

Optimizing code on GPUs, like on any other architecture requires careful consideration and balancing of resources and costs of various operations to obtain optimal performance. This tutorial explored optimizing reductions well beyond the territory of diminishing returns. This was deliberate to supply an excuse to introduce multiple optimization techniques and opportunities as well as necessary when accounting for the larger picture.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optimizing code on GPUs, like on any other architecture, requires careful consideration and balancing of resources and costs of various operations to obtain optimal performance. This document explored optimizing reductions much beyond the territory of diminishing returns. This approach allowed us to introduce multiple optimization techniques and discuss opportunities, which is helpful in the bigger scheme of things.

```

Here we focused on reductions when an entire device participates in it, but the choice of optimal compile-time constants or even the algorithm itself may not be optimal in cases when it's multiple blocks participating in multiple parallel reductions or even each thread doing a reduction of their own. Going in the opposite direction, when multiple devices participate in the same reduction a whole new set of aspects must be considered.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The document focused on reductions when an entire device participates in it, but the choice of optimal compile-time constants or even the algorithm itself might not be optimal in cases when its multiple blocks participate in multiple parallel reductions or when each thread performs its own reduction. However, when multiple devices participate in the same reduction, a whole new bunch of aspects must be considered.

```

> Most of these cases, including the one we just covered in this article, is given to end-users in a turn-key fashion via algorithm primitive libraries. They may not be the fastest in all of the cases, but are as close to being gold standards of carrying out certain operations as reasonably possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the solutions, including the ones covered in this document, are given to the end users in a turnkey fashion via algorithm primitive libraries. These solutions might not be the fastest in all cases, but are close to being gold standards of carrying out certain operations as reasonably as possible.
```

> .. meta::

Reviewer: Don't understand why these two items are not 10 and 11
![image](https://github.com/ROCm/HIP/assets/164940351/9290df95-9e79-497b-9f58-05d558e4fb90)

However, these items in a different section are 10 and 11 - shouldn't they be 1 and 2
![image](https://github.com/ROCm/HIP/assets/164940351/6a7182cf-2a74-4e84-abb2-df47bbe28f3c)

Author: These should be a subsection of point 9. Sent them lower level.

Author: Fixed.

  :description: The reduction tutorial on HIP
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, reduction, tutorial

*************************************************************
Tutorial: Reduction
*************************************************************

Reduction is an algorithmic operation that doesn't trivially map to GPUs but is
ubiquitous enough to be of general interest while providing an excuse to
introduce some key considerations of designing GPU algorithms and optimizing
them.

> *This article is a rejuvenation and extension of the invaluable work of Mark

Reviewer: I don't see a reason for this to be in italics. 
Also suggest you provide a link to Mark's work in this area.

Author: Fixed.

> Harris. While the author usually approaches the topic starting from a less
> naive approach, it is still valuable to rehash some of the original material to
> see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This article will go beyond
> to demonstrate progress in the state of the art since.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Harris. While the author usually approaches the topic from a less naive approach, reviewing some original material is valuable to see how much the underlying hardware has changed. This article will go beyond to demonstrate progress.*
```
